---
toc: true
toc-own-page: true
author: [Altair Bueno]
title: FaaS on a controlled environment
---

<!--
Informe de evaluación de plataformas de función como servicio en un entorno controlado

Al contrario que los sistemas de computación tradicionales, como los sistemas
cloud, la computación sin servidor, también conocida como función como servicio,
presenta un cambio de paradigma en el que las aplicaciones y sus funciones son
instanciadas y ejecutadas únicamente cuando éstas son invocadas. Esto no sólo
permite liberar los recursos de las infraestructuras cuando no se requiera un
uso de las aplicaciones, sino también un auto-escalado de las aplicaciones en
momentos de necesidad, lo que conlleva a un uso eficiente de recursos. En el
contexto del Internet de las Cosas (IoT) donde paradigmas con recursos limitados
como la computación en el borde (edge computing) juegan un papel muy importante
para el desarrollo de aplicaciones con requisitos de baja latencia, la
computación sin servidor se presenta como una tecnología prometedora. El
presente proyecto pretender estudiar la adopción y las limitaciones de la
computación sin servidor en este contexto. En primer lugar, el estudiante
realizará una aplicación IoT para validar la tecnología, y posteriormente, a
partir de los conocimientos adquiridos, adaptará el framework Kafka-ML del grupo
de investigación ERTIS para el uso de computación sin servidor. Kafka-ML es un
proyecto de código abierto para la gestión completa del ciclo de vida de
aplicaciones de aprendizaje automático a través de flujos continuos de datos.
La perfecta integración de las mencionadas tecnologías permitirá el desarrollo
de aplicaciones IoT y aprendizaje automático adaptadas a las necesidades de cada
momento.

---

recursos:
  - https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3565382.3565878
notas:
  - Debería separar fission, openfaas etc por secciones? CLI, instalación, UX, rendimiento....
    - CLI
    - Instalación
    - UX
    - Rendimiento
    - Triggers
    - Features diferenciadoras
    -

-->

# Introduction

In the recent years, FaaS (Functions as a Service) has proven to be a valid
alternative approach to traditional cloud computing. It's stateless nature
allows them to scale horizontally on-demand by reacting to events, which
translates to multiple instances running under heavy load, or no instances at
all. This automatic scaling is cost-effective, and empowers developers to focus
on solving problems instead of worrying about the underlying infrastructure.

Several Internet of Things (IoT) applications require efficient and flexible
cloud computing solutions that can react to handle the large and unpredictable
flows of data generated by the connected devices

While major cloud providers offer proprietary FaaS platforms, these are often
vendor-specific and lack flexibility. This document provides a general overview
of several open-source FaaS platforms and their potential applications in the
context of IoT

# OpenFaaS

It's a Kubernetes-native serverless platform featured on the Cloud Native
Landscape. It's licensed under the MIT license and it currently holds the title
for most stars of any installable serverless platform in GitHub, with over 22k
stars. OpenFaaS also offers a paid version, OpenFaaS Pro, which builds upon the
open source project to deliver some additional features and commercial support

The platform can be deployed to any certified Kubernetes distribution or a
single host. For our purposes, we decided to deploy the full OpenFaaS platform
on a Kubernetes cluster. The platform can be installed using Helm or Arkade
charts, allowing for customization on the installation. OpenFaaS also provides a
CLI, a single available for Linux, Windows and macOS. It provides tools for both
developing and managing functions, as well as the stack itself.

# Fission

Another Kubernetes-native serverless platform, also featured on the Cloud Native
Landscape. It's licensed under the Apache 2.0 license and has 7.4k stars on
GitHub. It offers an interesting concept called _environments_, which are a set
of running containers with a small dynamic loader ready to launch functions.
This allows for functions to start immediately, reducing the latencies for cold
starts

Fission can be installed using Helm charts or Kubernetes objects, although Helm
allows more features to be enabled. This is important, as the base Fission
installation only includes the core components required for developing and
testing functions. This results on a smaller control plane, but requires the
operator to enable each feature individually. For example, the Kafka event
trigger requires KEDA installed on the cluster, as well as enabling the KEDA
integration on Fission. The platform also provides a CLI for developing and
managing functions, a single binary available for Linux, Windows and macOS.

# OpenWhisk

A serverless platform from the Apache foundation, licensed under the Apache 2.0
license. It has the least amount of stars on GitHub of all three platforms, with
5.9k, but it offers some interesting features not available on neither Fission
or OpenFaaS

It can be installed through Docker, Kubernetes, Vagrant or directly on a host
machine
